Restructure and improve the docs (#679)
dylibso/chicory: docs/docs/usage/2-host-functions.md

---
sidebar_position: 2
sidebar_label: Host Functions
title: Host Functions
---
# Host and guests

In Wasm, the instance of a module is generally regarded as the **guest**,

> and the surrounding runtime environment is usually called the **host**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the surrounding runtime environment is called the **host**.
```

For example, an **application** using Chicory as a **library** would be the **host**

> to a Wasm module you have instantiated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to a Wasm module **guest** you have instantiated.
```

Wasm modules may **export** functions, so that they can be externally invoked.
But Wasm modules may also **import** functions. 
These imports have to be resolved at the time when a module is instantiated;
in other words, when a module is instantiated, the runtime has to provide
references for all the imports that a module declares.

The import/export mechanism is the way through which Wasm interacts 
with the outside world: without imports, a Wasm module is "pure compute",
that is, it cannot perform any kind of I/O, nor can it interact with other
modules.

## Host Functions

One way to fulfill imports is providing a **host function** written in Java. 

> Regardless of the source language that originated your Wasm module, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No matter what source language that your Wasm module was written in, 
```

it will be able to call this Java function when needed.

> It is called a **host** function, because it is written in the language of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is called a **host** function because it is executed in the environment of the
```

**host** (in this case, a JVM). As opposed to any other Wasm function, 
a **host function** is _unrestricted_ and it may interact with the surrounding

> environment in any arbitrary way. This let you effectively escape the sandbox.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
environment in any arbitrary way. This lets you effectively escape the sandbox.
As a consequence, host functions are a security boundary and
need to be implemented carefully if the Wasm code is not trusted.
```

> You can think of host functions as similar to system calls or the standard library in your favorite programming language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can think of host functions as similar to OS system calls or the standard library in your favorite programming language.
```

  new BufferedOutputStream(
    new FileOutputStream("docs/usage/2-host-functions.md.result"))));
```
-->

```java
import com.dylibso.chicory.runtime.Instance;
import com.dylibso.chicory.runtime.HostFunction;
import com.dylibso.chicory.wasm.types.ValueType;

var func = new HostFunction(
    "console",
    "log",
    List.of(ValueType.I32, ValueType.I32),
    List.of(),
    (Instance instance, long... args) -> {
        var len = (int) args[0];
        var offset = (int) args[1];
        var message = instance.memory().readString(offset, len);
        System.out.println(message);
        return null;
    });
```

The module calls `console.log` with the length of the string and an index (offset) in its memory. 
This is essentially a pointer into the Wasm's linear memory.
The `Instance` class provides a reference to a `Memory` object instance, that allows 
to pull a value out of memory. You can use the `readString()` convenience method
to read a buffer into a `String`; we can then print that to stdout on behalf of our Wasm program.

Note that the `HostFunction` needs 3 things:

1. The namespace and function name of the import (in our case it's `console` and `log` respectively)

> 2. The Wasm type signature (this function takes 2 `i32`s as arguments and returns nothing)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The Wasm type signature (this function takes two `i32`s as arguments and returns nothing)
```

3. A lambda to call when the Wasm module invokes the import

We now need to pass this host function when we instantiate the module.
We can do so by using a `Store`:

```java
import com.dylibso.chicory.wasm.Parser;
import com.dylibso.chicory.runtime.ImportValues;
import com.dylibso.chicory.runtime.Store;

// instantiate the store
var store = new Store();
// registers `console.log` in the store
store.addFunction(func);
var instance = store.instantiate("logger", Parser.parse(new File("./logger.wasm")));
var logIt = instance.export("logIt");
logIt.apply();
// should print "Hello, World!" 10 times

> ```

Reviewer: Let's add a link after

> For an easier way to write host function, see [Host Function Annotations].

Author: done
